README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img align="center" src="https://i.imgur.com/yL240c7.png" alt="Component logo" />
  <h1 align="center">
    <b>Component</b>
  </h1>
    <p align="center"><i>A simple JavaScript component thing</i><p>
</p>

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/%40scottjarvis%2Fcomponent.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/js/%40scottjarvis%2Fcomponent) [![Dependency Status](https://david-dm.org/sc0ttj/component.svg)](https://david-dm.org/sc0ttj/component) [![devDependencies Status](https://david-dm.org/sc0ttj/component/dev-status.svg)](https://david-dm.org/sc0ttj/component?type=dev) [![Node version](https://badgen.net/npm/node/@scottjarvis/component)](http://nodejs.org/download/) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/sc0ttj/component.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/sc0ttj/component) [![bundle size](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/@scottjarvis/component?color=green&label=gzipped)](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/@scottjarvis/component) [![Downloads](https://badgen.net/npm/dt/@scottjarvis/component)](https://badgen.net/npm/dt/@scottjarvis/component)

**Component** is a simple, "stateful component" thing.

It lets you create "functional components" - basically functions that have a "state". 

A "state" is a snapshot of your application data at a specific time.

## Features

- Easy setup, zero dependencies
- 1.7kb, minified and gzipped
- No build tools or transpiler needed
- Simple syntax, easy to use, easy to learn
- Plain JavaScript wherever possible
- Works **client-side**, in browsers:
  - add your component to the page as you would a normal Element
  - auto re-render on state change, using `requestAnimationFrame` and DOM-diffing
- Works **server-side**, in Node:
  - render your components as strings (HTML, stringified JSON)
  - render your components as data (JS objects or JSON)
- ...and more

Your components will support:

- Auto re-render to page on state change (_optional_)
- DOM diffing, with all DOM reads/writes performed inside `requestAnimationFrame` 
- Automatic "scoping"/prefixing of your component CSS (_optional_)
- Re-render styles on component CSS change (_optional_)
- Event attributes like `onclick`, `onchange`, `onkeyup`, etc, etc
- Easy state management:
  - define "actions" to easily update the state in specific ways 
  - a state timeline for debugging (_optional_):
    - a log/history of all changes to the component state
    - rewind or fast-forward to any point in the state history
    - save/load current or any previous state as "snapshots"
- Server side rendering:
  - render component views as a String, JSON, or Buffer
- Simple, stateless "child" components
- ...and more

## Limitations

Currently, the most important limitations are:

- No Event objects passed into components events attributes (`onclick`, etc)
- No JSX - uses template literals
- No CSS-in-JS - uses template literals

## Quickstart

```js

// Define a state
var state = { title: "Hello world!" }

// Define your component:

// 1. create it, pass in the state 
var App = new Component(state)

// 2. define a view
App.view = (props) => `<h1>${props.title}</h1>`

// 3. render into the given elem
App.render('.container')

// ...later

// Update the state, the page will re-render for you
App.setState({ title: "Hello again!" })
```

## Component overview

Methods:

- **App.view(props)**: receives a state and sets the component view to (re)render
- **App.style(props)**: receives a state and sets the `<style>` to (re)render
- **App.render(el)**: (re)render to the given element on state change (browser)
- **App.toString()**: render your component as a string on state change (NodeJS)
- **App.setState(obj)**: update the component state, triggers a re-render
- **App.actions(obj)**: creates chainable methods that simplify updating the state
- ...and more

Properties:

- **App.uid**: a unique string, generated once, on creation of a component
- **App.state**: an object, contains your app data, read-only - cannot be modified directly
- **App.log**: an array containing a history of all component states
- **App.css**: the `<style>` element which holds the component styles
- **App.container**: the HTML element into which the components view is rendered
- ...and more

Settings:

- **App.reactive**: if `false`, disables auto re-rendering on state change
- **App.scopedCss**: if `false`, disables auto-prefixing `.style()` CSS with the class `.${App.uid}`
- **App.debug**: if true, a record of states changes are kept in `.log`

## Installation

### In browsers:

```html
<script src="https://unpkg.com/@scottjarvis/component"></script>
<script>
  // use it here
</script>
```

### In NodeJS:

```
npm i @scottjarvis/component
```

Then add it to your project:

```js
var Component = require('@scottjarvis/component');

// use it here

```

## Usage

### In browsers

Create interactive components for your web pages:

See [examples/usage-in-browser.html](examples/usage-in-browser.html)

### In NodeJS

Or you can do "server-side rendering" (SSR) of your components:

```
node examples/usage-in-node.js
```

See [examples/usage-in-node.js](examples/usage-in-node.js)

## Advanced usage

### Styling your component

Use `.style()` to define some styles for your components view (optional):

```js
App.style = (props) => `
  #myapp {
    border: 2px solid ${props.borderColor || 'red'};
    margin: 0 auto;
    max-width: ${props.maxWidth};
  }
  .btn {
    background-color: ${props.btnColor || 'red'};
    padding: 6px;
  }
`
```

When your component is added to the page using `render()`, the CSS above will be prefixed with a unique class. That same unique class is also added to your components container element.

This prevents your component styles affecting other parts of the page.

It also keeps your component CSS clean - no need to prefix anything with a unique ID or class yourself.

You can disable this CSS "scoping"/prefixing by using `App.scopedCss = false`.

When rendering your component in NodeJS, or using `toString()`, your CSS will **not** be auto "scoped"/prefixed.

To see `style()` in use, see [examples/usage-in-browser.html](examples/usage-in-browser.html)

### Using "actions"

Define "actions" to update your state in specific ways.

These are like regular methods, except they're always chainable and tagged by name in your components state history

```js
App.actions({

  update:     (props) => App.setState({ props }), // same as calling App.setState()

  reset:      (props) => App.setState({ count: 0 }),

  count:      (props) => App.setState({ count: props }),

  plus:       (props) => App.setState({ count: App.state.count + props }),

  minus:      (props) => App.setState({ count: App.state.count - props }),

  items:      (props) => App.setState({ items: props }),

  addItems:   (props) => App.setState({ items: [ ...App.state.items, ...props ] }),

});

// If you defined some "actions", you can use them
// to update specific parts of your state
App.plus(105)
App.minus(5)

// A components "actions" can be chained
App
  .minus(1)
  .minus(1)
  .minus(1)
  .plus(3)
  .addItems([ { name: "two" }, { name: "three" } ])
```

### Using the "state history"

Here is how to "time travel" to previous states, or jump forward to more recent ones.

Note: To enable the state history, `App.debug` must be `true`.

```js

// enable logging of state history
App.debug = true

// Take a "snapshot" (we'll use it later)
var snapshot = App.state

// ...later

App.rw()         // go to initial state
App.ff()         // go to latest state
App.rw(2)        // rewind two steps to a previous state
App.ff(2)        // fast-forward two steps to a more current state

// Set a previous state
App.setState(App.log[0].state)

// Set a "named" state, from a previous point in time
App.setState(snapshot)
```

### Server side rendering

If running a NodeJS server, you can render the components as HTML strings or JSON.

Just define a view - a function which receives the state as `props` and returns the view as a string, object, etc.

```js
// create an HTML view, using template literals
var htmlView = props => `
    <div id=${props.id}>
      ${Heading("Total so far = " + props.count)}
      ${List(props.items)}
      ${Button("Click here", `App.clickBtn(${props.incrementBy})`)}
    </div>`

// or return the state itself (pure headless component)
var dataOnlyView = props => props

// or a custom JS object view
var jsonView = props => {
  return { count: props.count, items: props.items }
}

// Choose a view to render
App.view = htmlView


// render the component
App.render()


// ..other rendering options...

// print it to the terminal
console.log(App.render())

// Or render the component as an HTTP response,
// using something like express.js
res.send(App.render())

```

If rendering a component in NodeJS that has a `.view()` and `.style()`, or if calling `.toString()` directly, the output will be a string like this one:

```
"<style>
#myapp {
  border: 2px solid grey;
  margin: 0 auto;
  max-width: 360px;
}
.btn {
  background-color: black;
  color: white;
  padding: 6px;
}
</style>
<div id=\"foo-id\">
  <h1>Total so far = 101</h1>
  <ul><li>First</li><li>two</li><li>three</li></ul>
  <button class=\"btn\" onclick=App.clickBtn(5)>Click here</button>
</div>"
```

^ Any styles are wrapped in a `<style>` tag, and your view is rendered after that.

Note: your component CSS is not auto-prefixed or "scoped" with a unique class until/unless it's added to a container element, client-side, using `.render('.container')`.

## Changelog

**1.1.4**
- new: automatic "scoping" of component CSS
 - prevents component styles affecting other parts of page
 - simplifies writing CSS for your components:
   - removes the need to define unique namespaces (IDs, classes) in your component CSS
 - you can disable automatic CSS scoping like so: `App.scopedCss = false`
 - see [examples/usage-in-browser.html](examples/usage-in-browser.html)
 - README and example updates

**1.1.3**
- better performance:
  - only access/update the DOM from inside a `requestAnimationFrame`
  - only record state history if `.debug` is true
  - set `.debug` to false by default
- improved README:
  - added info about component settings (`reactive`, `debug`)


**1.1.2**
- fix: can re-render component to new container
- fix: can render multiple components to page
- fix: can call `setstate()` before defining `.view()`
- fix: can call `render()` before defining `.view()` (pointless for now)
- fix: don't attempt any styling if `.style()` not defined

**1.1.1**
- README fixes

**1.1.0**
- improved performance:
  - added DOM diffing, using [BAD-DOM](https://codepen.io/tevko/pen/LzXjKE?editors=0010)
  - only re-render `.view()` if needed
  - only re-render `<style>` if needed
- smaller filesize:
  - smaller method names: 
    - `.forward()` => `.ff()`
    - `.rewind()`  => `.rw()`
    - `.history`   => `.log`
  - removed:
    - `.undo()` and `.redo()` (use `.rw(1)`, and `.ff(1)`)
- better indentation for server-side rendering
- minify CSS added to components `<style>` tag
- updated examples
- updated README

**1.0.0**
- initial release

## Making changes to `Component`

Look in `src/component.js`, make any changes you like.

Minify it (your choice how), and save the minified version to `dist/component.min.js`

## Future improvements

- Performance:
  - Batched rendering: only needed in browser, use requestAnimationFrame:
    - [main-loop](https://github.com/Raynos/main-loop)
    - [Animation loops - gist](https://gist.github.com/louisremi/1114293)
  - Memoize state updates: so we can return cached states and views

- Usability:
  - Better CSS-in-JS: 
    - define a components CSS using regular JS objects (alternative to template strings)
    - auto-scoped CSS, with namespaced/prefixed classes 
    - see [twirl](https://github.com/benjamminj/twirl-js)
  - Better Event handling: so `onclick` etc receive proper `Event` objects. See these links:
    - [yo-yo](https://github.com/maxogden/yo-yo) - hooks into morphdom, and manually copies events handlers to new elems, if needed
    - [nano-html](https://github.com/choojs/nanohtml/blob/master/lib/set-attribute.js) - similar to above

- Better SSR
  - server-side: 
    - render as streams/chunks (deliver page to clients in bits, soon as its ready):
     - see [almost/stream-template](https://github.com/almost/stream-template)
     - see [bogas04/marinate](https://github.com/bogas04/marinate)
  - client-side: 
    - ability to "hydrate" or takeover a view that already exists in the page:
      - simply don't define a view, and call `App.render('.container')`:
        - any `id` or `class` attributes will become items in `App.state`
        - the contents will be grabbed and used for a new `.view()`
      - for (re)attaching events, see [yo-yo](https://github.com/maxogden/yo-yo)
  
- Universal rendering (add-on):
  - use [tagged templates](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) to render from HTML strings to:
    - virtual DOM (see `htm`, `hyperx`, `snabby`)
    - real DOM (see `htl`, `fast-html-parser`, `bel`, `genel`, ...)
    - ANSI console markup (?)
    - markdown (?)
    - files (?)

- Support for custom elements/Web Components
  - so you can use `<my-custom-app></my-custom-app>` in your HTML
  - see [Custom Element patterns](https://gist.github.com/WebReflection/ec9f6687842aa385477c4afca625bbf4)

## Related projects:

### DOM and DOM diffing

- [BAD-DOM](https://codepen.io/tevko/pen/LzXjKE?editors=0010) - a tiny (800 bytes) lazy DOM diffing function (used by this project)
- [morphdom](https://github.com/patrick-steele-idem/morphdom/) - a nice, fast DOM differ (not vdom, real DOM)
- [set-dom](https://github.com/DylanPiercey/set-dom) - tiny dom diffing library
- [fast-html-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fast-html-parser) - generate a simplified DOM tree from string, with basic element querying

### Template strings to real DOM nodes

- [htl](https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/htl)- by Mike Bostock, events, attr/styles as object, other syntactic sugar, 2kb
- [nanohtml](https://github.com/choojs/nanohtml) - uses vdom, can attach event listers, can do SSR, 8kb
- [domify-template-strings](https://github.com/loilo-archive/domify-template-strings) - get real DOM nodes from HTML template strings, browser only, no SSR
- [genel](https://github.com/capsidjs/genel) - create real DOM nodes from template string, browser only (no SSR), 639 bytes

### CSS in JS

- [twirl](https://github.com/benjamminj/twirl-js) - a tag for template literals, turns CSS into objects 
- `/(^|,)[\.#a-z][a-zA-Z0-9_\-:]*/gm` - match first part of CSS selector in a CSS string, useful for scoping (see https://regexr.com/524pu)
- `document.styleSheets[0].cssRules[0].style.cssText.split(/\;[\s.]/).slice(0,-1)` - convert cssText to array containing CSS proprties and values, like "margin:0 auto;"
- `str.replace(/([A-Z])/g, "-$1").toLowerCase()` - camelCase to hyphen-case converter
- `var cssClassMatchRegex = new RegExp(/\.(-?[_a-zA-Z]+[_a-zA-Z0-9-]*)(?![^\{]*\})/g)` - regex to match all classes in a string (maybe useful for "scoping")
- `Math.random().toString(36).split(".")[1]` - unique ID generator (create a unique id for each new component)
- `cssString.replace(/\n/g, '').replace(/\s\s+/g, ' ')` - minify string of CSS

### VDOM and VDOM diffing

- [developit/htm](https://github.com/developit/htm) - JSX like syntax in ES6 templates, generates vdom
- [snabbdom](https://github.com/snabbdom/snabbdom) - the vdom diffing library used by Vue.js
- [snabby](https://github.com/mreinstein/snabby) - use HTML template strings to generate vdom, use with snabbdom
- [petit-dom](https://github.com/yelouafi/petit-dom) - tiny vdom diffing and patching library
- [hyperx](https://github.com/choojs/hyperx) - tagged templates to vdom (used by [nanohtml](https://github.com/choojs/nanohtml)

### Routers

- [router](https://github.com/sc0ttj/router) - a tiny, simple isomorphic router, should play nice with this project

### Other tiny component libraries

- [yo-yo](https://github.com/maxogden/yo-yo/) - tiny UI library, DOM diffing (uses `morphdom`), Event handling, ES6 tagged template literals 
- [choojs](http://github.com/choojs/) - A 4kb framework for creating sturdy frontend applications, uses `yo-yo`
- [hyperapp](https://github.com/jorgebucaran/hyperapp) - The tiny framework for building web interfaces, React-like, uses h(), VDOM, etc
- [preact](https://github.com/preactjs/preact) - a 3.1kb alternative to React.js


## Further reading

- [get root selectors in CSS string](https://regexr.com/524pu)
- [regex to match css class name](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6329090/regex-to-match-a-css-class-name/6329126#6329126)
- [2ality - ES6 template strings](https://2ality.com/2015/01/template-strings-html.html)
- [Tagged template literals - more than you think](https://codeburst.io/javascript-es6-tagged-template-literals-a45c26e54761)
- [Exploring JS - Template literals](https://exploringjs.com/es6/ch_template-literals.html)
- [How to put a string in a JS regex](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4029109/javascript-regex-how-to-put-a-variable-inside-a-regular-expression)
- [Using "handleEvent()"](https://medium.com/@WebReflection/dom-handleevent-a-cross-platform-standard-since-year-2000-5bf17287fd38)
- [handleEvent gist](https://gist.github.com/WebReflection/35ca0e2ef2fb929143ea725f55bc0d63)
- [Custom Element patterns](https://gist.github.com/WebReflection/ec9f6687842aa385477c4afca625bbf4)

Commit message:

v1.1.5: fixed CSS scoping, more performant debugging

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img align="center" src="https://i.imgur.com/yL240c7.png" alt="Component logo" />
  <h1 align="center">
    <b>Component</b>
  </h1>
    <p align="center"><i>A simple JavaScript component thing</i><p>
</p>

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/%40scottjarvis%2Fcomponent.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/js/%40scottjarvis%2Fcomponent) [![Dependency Status](https://david-dm.org/sc0ttj/component.svg)](https://david-dm.org/sc0ttj/component) [![devDependencies Status](https://david-dm.org/sc0ttj/component/dev-status.svg)](https://david-dm.org/sc0ttj/component?type=dev) [![Node version](https://badgen.net/npm/node/@scottjarvis/component)](http://nodejs.org/download/) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/sc0ttj/component.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/sc0ttj/component) [![bundle size](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/@scottjarvis/component?color=green&label=gzipped)](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/@scottjarvis/component) [![Downloads](https://badgen.net/npm/dt/@scottjarvis/component)](https://badgen.net/npm/dt/@scottjarvis/component)

**Component** is a simple, "stateful component" thing.

It lets you create "functional components" - basically functions that have a "state". 

A "state" is a snapshot of your application data at a specific time.

## Features

- Easy setup, zero dependencies
- 1.7kb, minified and gzipped
- No build tools or transpiler needed
- Simple syntax, easy to use, easy to learn
- Plain JavaScript wherever possible
- Works **client-side**, in browsers:
  - add your component to the page as you would a normal Element
  - auto re-render on state change, using `requestAnimationFrame` and DOM-diffing
- Works **server-side**, in Node:
  - render your components as strings (HTML, stringified JSON)
  - render your components as data (JS objects or JSON)
- ...and more

Your components will support:

- Auto re-render to page on state change (_optional_)
- DOM diffing, with all DOM reads/writes performed inside `requestAnimationFrame` 
- Automatic "scoping"/prefixing of your component CSS (_optional_)
- Re-render styles on component CSS change (_optional_)
- Event attributes like `onclick`, `onchange`, `onkeyup`, etc, etc
- Easy state management:
  - define "actions" to easily update the state in specific ways 
  - a state timeline for debugging (_optional_):
    - a log/history of all changes to the component state
    - rewind or fast-forward to any point in the state history
    - save/load current or any previous state as "snapshots"
- Server side rendering:
  - render component views as a String, JSON, or Buffer
- Simple, stateless "child" components
- ...and more

## Limitations

Currently, the most important limitations are:

- No Event objects passed into components events attributes (`onclick`, etc)
- No JSX - uses template literals
- No CSS-in-JS - uses template literals

## Quickstart

```js

// Define a state
var state = { title: "Hello world!" }

// Define your component:

// 1. create it, pass in the state 
var App = new Component(state)

// 2. define a view
App.view = (props) => `<h1>${props.title}</h1>`

// 3. render into the given elem
App.render('.container')

// ...later

// Update the state, the page will re-render for you
App.setState({ title: "Hello again!" })
```

## Component overview

Methods:

- **App.view(props)**: receives a state and sets the component view to (re)render
- **App.style(props)**: receives a state and sets the `<style>` to (re)render
- **App.render(el)**: (re)render to the given element on state change (browser)
- **App.toString()**: render your component as a string on state change (NodeJS)
- **App.setState(obj)**: update the component state, triggers a re-render
- **App.actions(obj)**: creates chainable methods that simplify updating the state
- ...and more

Properties:

- **App.uid**: a unique string, generated once, on creation of a component
- **App.state**: an object, contains your app data, read-only - cannot be modified directly
- **App.log**: an array containing a history of all component states
- **App.css**: the `<style>` element which holds the component styles
- **App.container**: the HTML element into which the components view is rendered
- ...and more

Settings:

- **App.reactive**: if `false`, disables auto re-rendering on state change
- **App.scopedCss**: if `false`, disables auto-prefixing `.style()` CSS with the class `.${App.uid}`
- **App.debug**: if true, a record of states changes are kept in `.log`

## Installation

### In browsers:

```html
<script src="https://unpkg.com/@scottjarvis/component"></script>
<script>
  // use it here
</script>
```

### In NodeJS:

```
npm i @scottjarvis/component
```

Then add it to your project:

```js
var Component = require('@scottjarvis/component');

// use it here

```

## Usage

### In browsers

Create interactive components for your web pages:

See [examples/usage-in-browser.html](examples/usage-in-browser.html)

### In NodeJS

Or you can do "server-side rendering" (SSR) of your components:

```
node examples/usage-in-node.js
```

See [examples/usage-in-node.js](examples/usage-in-node.js)

## Advanced usage

### Styling your component

Use `.style()` to define some styles for your components view (optional):

```js
App.style = (props) => `
  #myapp {
    border: 2px solid ${props.borderColor || 'red'};
    margin: 0 auto;
    max-width: ${props.maxWidth};
  }
  .btn {
    background-color: ${props.btnColor || 'red'};
    padding: 6px;
  }
`
```

When your component is added to the page using `render('.container')`, the CSS above will be prefixed with the `id` or `className` of your container. 

_This CSS automatic "scoping"/prefixing will prevent your component styles affecting other parts of the page_.

It also keeps your component CSS clean - no need to prefix anything with a unique ID or class yourself.

If your container has no class or id attributes, then a unique string, `App.uid`, will be used instead.

You can disable automatic CSS "scoping"/prefixing by using `App.scopedCss = false`.

When rendering your component in NodeJS, or using `toString()`, your CSS will **not** be auto prefixed.

To see `style()` in use, see [examples/usage-in-browser.html](examples/usage-in-browser.html)

### Using "actions"

Define "actions" to update your state in specific ways.

These are like regular methods, except they're always chainable and tagged by name in your components state history

```js
App.actions({

  update:     (props) => App.setState({ props }), // same as calling App.setState()

  reset:      (props) => App.setState({ count: 0 }),

  count:      (props) => App.setState({ count: props }),

  plus:       (props) => App.setState({ count: App.state.count + props }),

  minus:      (props) => App.setState({ count: App.state.count - props }),

  items:      (props) => App.setState({ items: props }),

  addItems:   (props) => App.setState({ items: [ ...App.state.items, ...props ] }),

});

// If you defined some "actions", you can use them
// to update specific parts of your state
App.plus(105)
App.minus(5)

// A components "actions" can be chained
App
  .minus(1)
  .minus(1)
  .minus(1)
  .plus(3)
  .addItems([ { name: "two" }, { name: "three" } ])
```

### Using the "state history"

Here is how to "time travel" to previous states, or jump forward to more recent ones.

Note: To enable the state history, `App.debug` must be `true`.

```js

// enable logging of state history
App.debug = true

// Take a "snapshot" (we'll use it later)
var snapshot = App.state

// ...later

App.rw()         // go to initial state
App.ff()         // go to latest state
App.rw(2)        // rewind two steps to a previous state
App.ff(2)        // fast-forward two steps to a more current state

// Set a previous state
App.setState(App.log[0].state)

// Set a "named" state, from a previous point in time
App.setState(snapshot)
```

### Server side rendering

If running a NodeJS server, you can render the components as HTML strings or JSON.

Just define a view - a function which receives the state as `props` and returns the view as a string, object, etc.

```js
// create an HTML view, using template literals
var htmlView = props => `
    <div id=${props.id}>
      ${Heading("Total so far = " + props.count)}
      ${List(props.items)}
      ${Button("Click here", `App.clickBtn(${props.incrementBy})`)}
    </div>`

// or return the state itself (pure headless component)
var dataOnlyView = props => props

// or a custom JS object view
var jsonView = props => {
  return { count: props.count, items: props.items }
}

// Choose a view to render
App.view = htmlView


// render the component
App.render()


// ..other rendering options...

// print it to the terminal
console.log(App.render())

// Or render the component as an HTTP response,
// using something like express.js
res.send(App.render())

```

If rendering a component in NodeJS that has a `.view()` and `.style()`, or if calling `.toString()` directly, the output will be a string like this one:

```
"<style>
#myapp {
  border: 2px solid grey;
  margin: 0 auto;
  max-width: 360px;
}
.btn {
  background-color: black;
  color: white;
  padding: 6px;
}
</style>
<div id=\"foo-id\">
  <h1>Total so far = 101</h1>
  <ul><li>First</li><li>two</li><li>three</li></ul>
  <button class=\"btn\" onclick=App.clickBtn(5)>Click here</button>
</div>"
```

^ Any styles are wrapped in a `<style>` tag, and your view is rendered after that.

Note: your component CSS is not auto-prefixed or "scoped" with containers class/id until/unless it's added to a container element, client-side, using `.render('.container')`.

## Changelog

**1.1.5**
- fixed: scoped CSS sometimes not applied on page load:
  - here is the new implementation:
    - prefix component CSS with the containers existing `id` or `class`, if any
    - fall back to previous behaviour only if container has no `id` or `class`:
      - add unique class to container
      - prefix component CSS with that same unique class
- better performance:
  - when `debug` is true,  _don't_ console log state history on state change
  - to see the state history, access `App.log` yourself instead
 - see [examples/usage-in-browser.html](examples/usage-in-browser.html)
  
**1.1.4**
- new: automatic "scoping" of component CSS
 - prevents component styles affecting other parts of page
 - simplifies writing CSS for your components:
   - removes the need to define unique namespaces (IDs, classes) in your component CSS
 - you can disable automatic CSS scoping like so: `App.scopedCss = false`
 - see [examples/usage-in-browser.html](examples/usage-in-browser.html)
 - README and example updates

**1.1.3**
- better performance:
  - only access/update the DOM from inside a `requestAnimationFrame`
  - only record state history if `.debug` is true
  - set `.debug` to false by default
- improved README:
  - added info about component settings (`reactive`, `debug`)


**1.1.2**
- fix: can re-render component to new container
- fix: can render multiple components to page
- fix: can call `setstate()` before defining `.view()`
- fix: can call `render()` before defining `.view()` (pointless for now)
- fix: don't attempt any styling if `.style()` not defined

**1.1.1**
- README fixes

**1.1.0**
- improved performance:
  - added DOM diffing, using [BAD-DOM](https://codepen.io/tevko/pen/LzXjKE?editors=0010)
  - only re-render `.view()` if needed
  - only re-render `<style>` if needed
- smaller filesize:
  - smaller method names: 
    - `.forward()` => `.ff()`
    - `.rewind()`  => `.rw()`
    - `.history`   => `.log`
  - removed:
    - `.undo()` and `.redo()` (use `.rw(1)`, and `.ff(1)`)
- better indentation for server-side rendering
- minify CSS added to components `<style>` tag
- updated examples
- updated README

**1.0.0**
- initial release

## Making changes to `Component`

Look in `src/component.js`, make any changes you like.

Minify it (your choice how), and save the minified version to `dist/component.min.js`

## Future improvements

- Performance:
  - Batched rendering: only needed in browser, use requestAnimationFrame:
    - [main-loop](https://github.com/Raynos/main-loop)
    - [Animation loops - gist](https://gist.github.com/louisremi/1114293)
  - Memoize state updates: so we can return cached states and views

- Usability:
  - Better CSS-in-JS: 
    - define a components CSS using regular JS objects (alternative to template strings)
    - auto-scoped CSS, with namespaced/prefixed classes 
    - see [twirl](https://github.com/benjamminj/twirl-js)
  - Better Event handling: so `onclick` etc receive proper `Event` objects. See these links:
    - [yo-yo](https://github.com/maxogden/yo-yo) - hooks into morphdom, and manually copies events handlers to new elems, if needed
    - [nano-html](https://github.com/choojs/nanohtml/blob/master/lib/set-attribute.js) - similar to above

- Better SSR
  - server-side: 
    - render as streams/chunks (deliver page to clients in bits, soon as its ready):
     - see [almost/stream-template](https://github.com/almost/stream-template)
     - see [bogas04/marinate](https://github.com/bogas04/marinate)
  - client-side: 
    - ability to "hydrate" or takeover a view that already exists in the page:
      - simply don't define a view, and call `App.render('.container')`:
        - any `id` or `class` attributes will become items in `App.state`
        - the contents will be grabbed and used for a new `.view()`
      - for (re)attaching events, see [yo-yo](https://github.com/maxogden/yo-yo)
  
- Universal rendering (add-on):
  - use [tagged templates](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) to render from HTML strings to:
    - virtual DOM (see `htm`, `hyperx`, `snabby`)
    - real DOM (see `htl`, `fast-html-parser`, `bel`, `genel`, ...)
    - ANSI console markup (?)
    - markdown (?)
    - files (?)

- Support for custom elements/Web Components
  - so you can use `<my-custom-app></my-custom-app>` in your HTML
  - see [Custom Element patterns](https://gist.github.com/WebReflection/ec9f6687842aa385477c4afca625bbf4)

## Related projects:

### DOM and DOM diffing

- [BAD-DOM](https://codepen.io/tevko/pen/LzXjKE?editors=0010) - a tiny (800 bytes) lazy DOM diffing function (used by this project)
- [morphdom](https://github.com/patrick-steele-idem/morphdom/) - a nice, fast DOM differ (not vdom, real DOM)
- [set-dom](https://github.com/DylanPiercey/set-dom) - tiny dom diffing library
- [fast-html-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fast-html-parser) - generate a simplified DOM tree from string, with basic element querying

### Template strings to real DOM nodes

- [htl](https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/htl)- by Mike Bostock, events, attr/styles as object, other syntactic sugar, 2kb
- [nanohtml](https://github.com/choojs/nanohtml) - uses vdom, can attach event listers, can do SSR, 8kb
- [domify-template-strings](https://github.com/loilo-archive/domify-template-strings) - get real DOM nodes from HTML template strings, browser only, no SSR
- [genel](https://github.com/capsidjs/genel) - create real DOM nodes from template string, browser only (no SSR), 639 bytes

### CSS in JS

- [twirl](https://github.com/benjamminj/twirl-js) - a tag for template literals, turns CSS into objects 
- `/(^|,)[\.#a-z][a-zA-Z0-9_\-:]*/gm` - match first part of CSS selector in a CSS string, useful for scoping (see https://regexr.com/524pu)
- `document.styleSheets[0].cssRules[0].style.cssText.split(/\;[\s.]/).slice(0,-1)` - convert cssText to array containing CSS proprties and values, like "margin:0 auto;"
- `str.replace(/([A-Z])/g, "-$1").toLowerCase()` - camelCase to hyphen-case converter
- `var cssClassMatchRegex = new RegExp(/\.(-?[_a-zA-Z]+[_a-zA-Z0-9-]*)(?![^\{]*\})/g)` - regex to match all classes in a string (maybe useful for "scoping")
- `Math.random().toString(36).split(".")[1]` - unique ID generator (create a unique id for each new component)
- `cssString.replace(/\n/g, '').replace(/\s\s+/g, ' ')` - minify string of CSS

### VDOM and VDOM diffing

- [developit/htm](https://github.com/developit/htm) - JSX like syntax in ES6 templates, generates vdom
- [snabbdom](https://github.com/snabbdom/snabbdom) - the vdom diffing library used by Vue.js
- [snabby](https://github.com/mreinstein/snabby) - use HTML template strings to generate vdom, use with snabbdom
- [petit-dom](https://github.com/yelouafi/petit-dom) - tiny vdom diffing and patching library
- [hyperx](https://github.com/choojs/hyperx) - tagged templates to vdom (used by [nanohtml](https://github.com/choojs/nanohtml)

### Routers

- [router](https://github.com/sc0ttj/router) - a tiny, simple isomorphic router, should play nice with this project

### Other tiny component libraries

- [yo-yo](https://github.com/maxogden/yo-yo/) - tiny UI library, DOM diffing (uses `morphdom`), Event handling, ES6 tagged template literals 
- [choojs](http://github.com/choojs/) - A 4kb framework for creating sturdy frontend applications, uses `yo-yo`
- [hyperapp](https://github.com/jorgebucaran/hyperapp) - The tiny framework for building web interfaces, React-like, uses h(), VDOM, etc
- [preact](https://github.com/preactjs/preact) - a 3.1kb alternative to React.js


## Further reading

- [get root selectors in CSS string](https://regexr.com/524pu)
- [regex to match css class name](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6329090/regex-to-match-a-css-class-name/6329126#6329126)
- [2ality - ES6 template strings](https://2ality.com/2015/01/template-strings-html.html)
- [Tagged template literals - more than you think](https://codeburst.io/javascript-es6-tagged-template-literals-a45c26e54761)
- [Exploring JS - Template literals](https://exploringjs.com/es6/ch_template-literals.html)
- [How to put a string in a JS regex](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4029109/javascript-regex-how-to-put-a-variable-inside-a-regular-expression)
- [Using "handleEvent()"](https://medium.com/@WebReflection/dom-handleevent-a-cross-platform-standard-since-year-2000-5bf17287fd38)
- [handleEvent gist](https://gist.github.com/WebReflection/35ca0e2ef2fb929143ea725f55bc0d63)
- [Custom Element patterns](https://gist.github.com/WebReflection/ec9f6687842aa385477c4afca625bbf4)
